documentation: add documentation for buildMaven (#100660)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/languages-frameworks/maven.md

  }
```

> It would be great if we could specify a remote repository as $HOME/.m2/repository to make downloads faster, however that functionality was removed. If you'd like add it to your settings.xml

The build will fail, and tell you the expected hash to place. After which once you have, the build will return with a _/nix/store_ entry whose contents are the full Maven repository.

> Some additional files are deleted that would cause the output hash to change potentially on subsequent runs.

```bash
❯ tree /nix/store/bxhr4p2x99jvqk027jsv250b861wklsq-dependencies/.m2
├── backport-util-concurrent
│   └── backport-util-concurrent
│       └── 3.1
│           ├── backport-util-concurrent-3.1.pom
│           ├── backport-util-concurrent-3.1.pom.sha1
│           └── _remote.repositories
├── classworlds
│   └── classworlds
│       ├── 1.1
│       │   ├── classworlds-1.1.jar
│       │   ├── classworlds-1.1.jar.sha1
│       │   ├── classworlds-1.1.pom
│       │   ├── classworlds-1.1.pom.sha1
│       │   └── _remote.repositories
```

If your package uses SNAPSHOT dependencies or version ranges; there is a strong likelihood that over-time your output hash will change.

> ## buildMaven

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## buildMaven with NixOS/mvn2nix-maven-plugin
```

> > ⚠️ Although _buildMaven_ is the "blessed" way within nixpkgs, it hasn't seen much activity in quite a while.

Reviewer: If it picks up momentum this note may linger for quite a while. It'd be more helpful to tell the reader why they may not be able to use it and what could be done about it. On the other hand you've done your research, so putting a date in it also solves it afaic.

```suggestion
> ⚠️ Although _buildMaven_ is the "blessed" way within nixpkgs. As of 2020, it hasn't seen much activity in quite a while.
```

We will use the same repositories we built above (either _double invocation_ or _buildMaven_) to setup a classpath for our Jar.

Setup your _pom.xml_ to create a Jar with the following manifest:
```xml
<plugin>
    <artifactId>maven-jar-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>3.2.0</version>
    <configuration>
        <archive>
            <manifest>
                <addClasspath>true</addClasspath>
                <classpathPrefix>lib/</classpathPrefix>
                <classpathLayoutType>repository</classpathLayoutType>
                <mainClass>$YOUR_MAIN_CLASS_HERE</mainClass>
            </manifest>
            <manifestEntries>
                <Class-Path>.</Class-Path>
            </manifestEntries>
        </archive>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
```

> This instructs the Jar to look for the necessary dependencies in the _lib/_ relative folder. The layout of the folder is also in the _maven repository_ style.

```nix
# create a repository using one of the methods above
let repository = ....;
in
stdenv.mkDerivation rec {
  pname = "your-pkg";
  version = "0.1";

>   name = "${pname}-${version}";

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

>   src = ./.;

Reviewer 2: ?

Author: Added a comment addressing it can be fetchFromGitHub or whatnot.

>   src = ./.;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  src = ./.; # or fetchFromGitHub, cleanSourceWith, etc
```

>   buildInputs = [ jdk maven makeWrapper ];

Reviewer 2: Technically they aren't needed as they are referenced thanks to the `makeWrapper` call.

```suggestion
  buildInputs = [ makeWrapper ];
```

Reviewer: We're invoking `mvn` in via `PATH` in `buildPhase` though. I figure a `jdk` command is also necessary for `mvn compile`

Reviewer 3: > I figure a jdk command is also necessary for mvn compile

`maven` closes `pkgs.jdk` in `makeWrapper` (https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/development/tools/build-managers/apache-maven/builder.sh) which sometimes is wrong Java version (8 vs.11 issue) for a given build.

Author: I'll add a section on "Choosing the correct JDK" 
The current **mvn** derivation allows overriding _JAVA_HOME_

```bash
❯ cat /nix/store/2hhmmj0vbb5d181nfx2mx3p7k54q44ij-apache-maven-3.6.3/bin/mvn

#! /nix/store/6737cq9nvp4k5r70qcgf61004r0l2g3v-bash-4.4-p23/bin/bash -e
export JAVA_HOME=${JAVA_HOME-'/nix/store/knh4n8fzrslyzgrw6p8nh5v07s0ycznc-openjdk-8u265-ga'}
exec "/nix/store/2hhmmj0vbb5d181nfx2mx3p7k54q44ij-apache-maven-3.6.3/maven/bin/mvn"  "$@"
```

What i've done in the past is just make sure to set JAVA_HOME to the correct JDK (i.e. JDK8 vs JDK11).
An alternative approach would also be to `overrideAttrs`

  buildPhase = ''

>     echo "Using repository ${repository}"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: This is really not a bad idea to print, for easy troubleshooting when packaging. If `stdenv.mkDerivation` should set the bar, this logging is more useful than most of what's printed.

Author: I agree I kind of like the helpful echo here.

    mvn package --offline -Dmaven.repo.local=${repository}
  '';

  installPhase = ''
    # create the bin directory
    mkdir -p $out/bin
    # create a symbolic link for the lib directory
    ln -s ${repository} $out/lib
    # copy out the JAR
    # Maven already setup the classpath to use m2 repository layout
    # with the prefix of lib/
    cp target/${name}.jar $out/
    # create a wrapper that will automatically set the classpath
    # this should be the paths from the dependency derivation
    makeWrapper ${jdk}/bin/java $out/bin/${pname} \
          --add-flags "-jar $out/${name}.jar" \
          --set M2_HOME ${maven} \
          --set JAVA_HOME ${jdk}
  '';
}
```

> This will give you an executable shell script that launches your Jar with all the dependencies available. What's great is that it leverages the _/nix/store_ so you can share & re-use already available store entries.

Reviewer 2: Share & re-use?

        xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
  <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
  <groupId>org.nixos</groupId>
  <artifactId>maven-demo</artifactId>
  <version>1.0</version>
  <packaging>jar</packaging>
  <name>NixOS Maven Demo</name>

  <dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>com.vdurmont</groupId>
        <artifactId>emoji-java</artifactId>
        <version>5.1.1</version>
      </dependency>
  </dependencies>
</project>
```

Our main class file will be very simple:

```java
import com.vdurmont.emoji.EmojiParser;

public class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    String str = "NixOS :grinning: is super cool :smiley:!";
    String result = EmojiParser.parseToUnicode(str);
    System.out.println(result);
  }
}
```

### Solving for dependencies

## Double Invocation

> ⚠️ This pattern is the simplest but may cause unnecessary rebuilds due to the output hash changing.

The double invocation is a _simple_ way to get around the problem that _nix-build_ may be sandboxed and have no Internet connectivity.

> It relies on the fact that Nix allows network access for **Fixed Output Derivations**.

Reviewer: This sounds a bit hacky but it's not the actual hacky part, the way I see it. I'd phrase it as

```suggestion
It treats the entire Maven repository as a single source to be downloaded, relying on Maven's dependency resolution to satisfy the output hash. This is similar to fetchers like `fetchgit`, except it has to run a Maven build to determine what to download.
```

The first step will be to build the Maven project as a fixed-output derivation in order to collect the Maven repository.

> Traditionally the Maven repository is at _~/.m2/repository_. We will override this to be the $out directory.

```nix
{ pkgs ? import <nixpkgs> {}, stdenv ? pkgs.stdenv, maven ? pkgs.maven}:
with stdenv;
mkDerivation {
    name = "maven-repository";
    buildInputs = [ maven ];
    src = ./.; # or fetchFromGitHub, cleanSourceWith, etc
    buildPhase = ''
      mvn package -Dmaven.repo.local=$out
    '';

    # keep only *.{pom,jar,sha1,nbm} and delete all ephemeral files with lastModified timestamps inside
    installPhase = ''
      find $out -type f \
        -name \*.lastUpdated -or \
        -name resolver-status.properties -or \
        -name _remote.repositories \
        -delete
    '';

    # don't do any fixup
    dontFixup = true;
    outputHashAlgo = "sha256";
    outputHashMode = "recursive";
    outputHash = "0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000";
  }
```

> The build will fail, and tell you the expected hash to place. After which once you have, the build will return with a _/nix/store_ entry whose contents are the full Maven repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The build will fail, and tell you the expected `outputHash` to place. When you've set the hash, the build will return with a _/nix/store_ entry whose contents are the full Maven repository.
```

│       │   ├── classworlds-1.1.jar
```

If your package uses SNAPSHOT dependencies or version ranges; there is a strong likelihood that over-time your output hash will change since the resolved dependencies may change.

## buildMaven with NixOS/mvn2nix-maven-plugin

> ⚠️ Although _buildMaven_ is the "blessed" way within nixpkgs, as of 2020, it hasn't seen much activity in quite a while.

_buildMaven_ is an alternative method that tries to follow similar patterns of other programming languages by generating a lock file. It relies on the maven plugin [mvn2nix-maven-plugin](https://github.com/NixOS/mvn2nix-maven-plugin).

First you generate a _project-info.json_ file using the maven plugin.

> This should be executed in the project's source repository or be told which _pom.xml_ to execute with.

```bash
# run this step within the project's source repository
❯ mvn org.nixos.mvn2nix:mvn2nix-maven-plugin:mvn2nix

❯ cat project-info.json | jq | head
{
  "project": {
    "artifactId": "maven-demo",
    "groupId": "org.nixos",
    "version": "1.0",
    "classifier": "",
    "extension": "jar",
    "dependencies": [
      {
        "artifactId": "maven-resources-plugin",
```

> This file is then given to the _buildMaven_ function, and it returns 3 properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This file is then given to the _buildMaven_ function, and it returns 3 attributes.
```

**build**:
    A simple derivation that runs through _mvn compile_ & _mvn package_ to build the JAR. You may use this as inspiration for more complicated derivations.

Here is an example of building the Maven repository
```nix
{ pkgs ? import <nixpkgs> {} }:
with pkgs;
let build = buildMaven ./project-info.json;
in
build.repo
```

The benefit over the _double invocation_, is that the _/nix/store_ entry is a _linkFarm_ of every package, so that changes to your dependency set doesn't involve downloading everything from scratch.

```bash
❯ tree /nix/store/g87va52nkc8jzbmi1aqdcf2f109r4dvn-maven-repository | head
/nix/store/g87va52nkc8jzbmi1aqdcf2f109r4dvn-maven-repository
├── antlr
│   └── antlr
│       └── 2.7.2
│           ├── antlr-2.7.2.jar -> /nix/store/d027c8f2cnmj5yrynpbq2s6wmc9cb559-antlr-2.7.2.jar
│           └── antlr-2.7.2.pom -> /nix/store/mv42fc5gizl8h5g5vpywz1nfiynmzgp2-antlr-2.7.2.pom
├── avalon-framework
│   └── avalon-framework
│       └── 4.1.3
│           ├── avalon-framework-4.1.3.jar -> /nix/store/iv5fp3955w3nq28ff9xfz86wvxbiw6n9-avalon-framework-4.1.3.jar
```

## Building a JAR

> Regardless of which strategy is chosen above, the step to build the derivation now becomes the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regardless of which strategy is chosen above, the step to build the derivation is the same.
```

```nix
{ pkgs ? import <nixpkgs> { }, stdenv ? pkgs.stdenv, lib ? pkgs.lib
, maven ? pkgs.maven }:
# pick a repository derivation from above
let repository = ...;
in stdenv.mkDerivation rec {
  pname = "maven-demo";
  version = "1.0";

>   src = lib.cleanSourceWith {

Reviewer 2: Why is it need to be cleaned?

Author: Fixed

    filter = lib.cleanSourceFilter;
    src = lib.cleanSourceWith {
      filter = path: type:
        !(lib.pathIsDirectory (path) && baseNameOf (toString (path))
          == "target");

>       src = ./.; # or fetchFromGitHub, cleanSourceWith, etc

Reviewer 2: This example should use `fetchFromGitHub` as the docs _first_ document how to add packages to Nixpkgs. The advanced users who will need this method for project's development will get along by knowing they should replace this with `./.`

Author: Fixed

    };
  };
  buildInputs = [ maven ];

  buildPhase = ''
    echo "Using repository ${repository}"
    mvn --offline -Dmaven.repo.local=${repository} package;
  '';

  installPhase = ''

>     mkdir $out/share/java
>     cp target/${pname}-${version}.jar $out/share/java

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    install -Dm644 target/${pname}-${version}.jar $out/share/java
```

  '';
}
```

> > We place the library in _$out/share/java_ since JDK have a _stdenv setup hook_ that add any JARs in the _share/java_ directories of the build inputs to the CLASSPATH environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We place the library in _$out/share/java_ since JDK package has a _stdenv setup hook_ that adds any JARs in the _share/java_ directories of the build inputs to the CLASSPATH environment.
```

  </plugins>
</build>
```

> This instructs the JAR to look for the necessary dependencies in the _lib/_ relative folder. The layout of the folder is also in the _maven repository_ style.

We will modify the derivation above to add a symlink to our repository so that it's accessible to our JAR during the _installPhase_.

```nix
{ pkgs ? import <nixpkgs> { }, stdenv ? pkgs.stdenv, lib ? pkgs.lib
, maven ? pkgs.maven, jre ? pkgs.jre, makeWrapper ? pkgs.makeWrapper }:
# pick a repository derivation from above
let repository = ...;
in stdenv.mkDerivation rec {
  pname = "maven-demo";
  version = "1.0";

  src = lib.cleanSourceWith {
    filter = lib.cleanSourceFilter;
    src = lib.cleanSourceWith {
      filter = path: type:
        !(lib.pathIsDirectory (path) && baseNameOf (toString (path))
          == "target");
      src = ./.; # or fetchFromGitHub, cleanSourceWith, etc
    };
  };
  buildInputs = [ maven makeWrapper];

  buildPhase = ''
    echo "Using repository ${repository}"
    mvn --offline -Dmaven.repo.local=${repository} package;
  '';

  installPhase = ''
    # create the bin directory
    mkdir -p $out/bin
    # create a symbolic link for the lib directory

>     ln -s ${repository} $out/lib

Reviewer 2: Why is this needed?

    # copy out the JAR
    # Maven already setup the classpath to use m2 repository layout
    # with the prefix of lib/

>     cp target/${pname}-${version}.jar $out/

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be `$out/share/java/` as in "Building a JAR"?

Author: Fixed

    # create a wrapper that will automatically set the classpath
    # this should be the paths from the dependency derivation
    makeWrapper ${jre}/bin/java $out/bin/${pname} \
          --add-flags "-jar $out/${pname}-${version}.jar"
  '';
}
```

> > Our script relies in _jre_ rather than _jdk_ to restrict the runtime closure necessary to run the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Our script produces a dependency on _jre_ rather than _jdk_ to restrict the runtime closure necessary to run the application.
```

> This will give you an executable shell-script that launches your JAR with all the dependencies available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will give you an executable shell script that launches your JAR with all the dependencies available.
```

├── avalon-framework
│   └── avalon-framework
│       └── 4.1.3
│           ├── avalon-framework-4.1.3.jar -> /nix/store/iv5fp3955w3nq28ff9xfz86wvxbiw6n9-avalon-framework-4.1.3.jar
```
### Double Invocation

> ⚠️ This pattern is the simplest but may cause unnecessary rebuilds due to the output hash changing.

The double invocation is a _simple_ way to get around the problem that _nix-build_ may be sandboxed and have no Internet connectivity.

It treats the entire Maven repository as a single source to be downloaded, relying on Maven's dependency resolution to satisfy the output hash. This is similar to fetchers like `fetchgit`, except it has to run a Maven build to determine what to download.

The first step will be to build the Maven project as a fixed-output derivation in order to collect the Maven repository -- below is an [example](https://github.com/fzakaria/nixos-maven-example/blob/main/double-invocation-repository.nix).

> Traditionally the Maven repository is at _~/.m2/repository_. We will override this to be the $out directory.

```nix
{ pkgs ? import <nixpkgs> { }, stdenv ? pkgs.stdenv, maven ? pkgs.maven }:

> with stdenv;

Reviewer 2: Never do that, especially in docs! https://nix.dev/anti-patterns/language.html#with-attrset-expression

  '';

  # keep only *.{pom,jar,sha1,nbm} and delete all ephemeral files with lastModified timestamps inside
  installPhase = ''
    find $out -type f \
      -name \*.lastUpdated -or \
      -name resolver-status.properties -or \
      -name _remote.repositories \
      -delete
  '';

  # don't do any fixup
  dontFixup = true;
  outputHashAlgo = "sha256";
  outputHashMode = "recursive";
  # replace this with the correct SHA256
  outputHash = stdenv.lib.fakeSha256;
}
```

The build will fail, and tell you the expected `outputHash` to place. When you've set the hash, the build will return with a _/nix/store_ entry whose contents are the full Maven repository.

> Some additional files are deleted that would cause the output hash to change potentially on subsequent runs.

```bash
❯ tree $(nix-build --no-out-link double-invocation-repository.nix) | head
/nix/store/8kicxzp98j68xyi9gl6jda67hp3c54fq-maven-repository
├── backport-util-concurrent
│   └── backport-util-concurrent
│       └── 3.1
│           ├── backport-util-concurrent-3.1.pom
│           └── backport-util-concurrent-3.1.pom.sha1
├── classworlds
│   └── classworlds
│       ├── 1.1
│       │   ├── classworlds-1.1.jar
```

> If your package uses _SNAPSHOT_ dependencies or _version ranges_; there is a strong likelihood that over-time your output hash will change since the resolved dependencies may change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your package uses _SNAPSHOT_ dependencies or _version ranges_; there is a strong likelihood that over-time your output hash will change since the resolved dependencies may change. Hence this method is less recommended then using `buildMaven`.
```

## Building a JAR

Regardless of which strategy is chosen above, the step to build the derivation is the same.

```nix
{ pkgs ? import <nixpkgs> { }, stdenv ? pkgs.stdenv, lib ? pkgs.lib
, maven ? pkgs.maven, callPackage ? pkgs.callPackage }:
# pick a repository derivation, here we will use buildMaven

> let repository = callPackage ./build-maven-repository.nix { };

Reviewer 2: Excellent, much better now.

Author: :+1:

in stdenv.mkDerivation rec {
  pname = "maven-demo";
  version = "1.0";

  src = builtins.fetchTarball "https://github.com/fzakaria/nixos-maven-example/archive/main.tar.gz";
  buildInputs = [ maven ];

  buildPhase = ''
    echo "Using repository ${repository}"
    mvn --offline -Dmaven.repo.local=${repository} package;
  '';

  installPhase = ''
    install -Dm644 target/${pname}-${version}.jar $out/share/java
  '';
}
```

> We place the library in _$out/share/java_ since JDK package has a _stdenv setup hook_ that adds any JARs in the _share/java_ directories of the build inputs to the CLASSPATH environment.

```bash
❯ tree $(nix-build --no-out-link build-jar.nix)
/nix/store/7jw3xdfagkc2vw8wrsdv68qpsnrxgvky-maven-demo-1.0
└── share
    └── java
        └── maven-demo-1.0.jar

2 directories, 1 file
```

## Runnable JAR

> You are able to run `mvn compile` but how do you get a runnable artifact without having to use something like building an UberJar ?

Reviewer 2: I don't know what is UberJar. Is it worth mentioning? How about:

```suggestion
The previous example builds a `jar` file but that's not a file one can run. You need to use it with `java -jar $out/share/java/output.jar`. The following explains how to use `makeWrapper` in order to make the derivation produce an executable that will run the JAR file you created. 
```

We will use the same repository we built above (either _double invocation_ or _buildMaven_) to setup a CLASSPATH for our JAR.

> ### CLASSPATH

Reviewer 2: I'm a little bit confused about this section. In the derivation of it you create a wrapper, and that calls Main as it seems. What's the difference between this and the last example expression?

Author: So fundamentally, your Java invocation needs to have **all** dependencies on the CLASSPATH.
> CLASSPATH is the search path Java uses to lookup classes

The CLASSPATH can be set explicitly within a JAR which the subsequent section does through the help of Maven via the plugin via the MANIFEST file.

Here is the contents of the JAR and we see the CLASSPATH is set and expected at a fixed location relative to the JAR.
```bash
❯ unzip -q -c /nix/store/8d4c3ibw8ynsn01ibhyqmc1zhzz75s26-maven-demo-1.0/share/java/maven-demo-1.0.jar
Manifest-Version: 1.0
Archiver-Version: Plexus Archiver
Built-By: nixbld
Class-Path: . ../../repository/com/vdurmont/emoji-java/5.1.1/emoji-jav
 a-5.1.1.jar ../../repository/org/json/json/20170516/json-20170516.jar
Created-By: Apache Maven 3.6.3
Build-Jdk: 1.8.0_265
Main-Class: Main
```

The first approach though instead builds the JAR normally and then augments the _makeWrapper_ to set the CLASSPATH via the command line.

You've given feedback on providing context on which is appropriate which I will do.

Fundamentally, if you are a _nixpkgs_ author wrapping another project, the method by setting the CLASSPATH via _makeWrapper_ is preferable since it's a bit more of a pain to create a patch file to change the project's pom.xml

If you are a project writer and using nix-shell or nix-build to build your project, it would be easier for you to modify your pom to add the required plugin.

Reviewer 2: I don't read your comments, as I expect these explanations to be in the documentation.

We will read the Maven repository and flatten it to a single list. This list will then be concatenated with the _CLASSPATH_ separator to create the full classpath.

We make sure to provide this classpath to the _makeWrapper_.

> > readTree may be soon availble in nixpkgs via https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/101096

Reviewer: Merged, but should not be used for this. It creates an unnecessary IFD dependency. The same logic can be implemented in bash, where it won't cause evaluation to wait for a build, among other (usually small) issues.

> > readTree may be soon availble in nixpkgs via https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/101096

Reviewer 2: Once again, because you don't differentiate in this document between "what writers of `shell.nix` should do" vs "what Nixpkgs contribtors should do", this gets messy and you end up sort of recommending an IFD practice. Perhaps it's not bad for a developer to have IFD in their workflow, but this doc should warrant this never the less.

> > readTree may be soon availble in nixpkgs via https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/101096

Author: @roberth I merged your suggestions anyways to avoid the IFD
Thank you for taking the time to explain it to me.

> > readTree may be soon availble in nixpkgs via https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/101096

Reviewer 2: @fzakaria I'm unresolving this, as in general the document is missing the distinction between "What `shell.nix` writers need", and "What Nixpkgs' contributors need".

```nix
{ pkgs ? import <nixpkgs> { }, stdenv ? pkgs.stdenv, lib ? pkgs.lib
, maven ? pkgs.maven, callPackage ? pkgs.callPackage
, makeWrapper ? pkgs.makeWrapper, jre ? pkgs.jre }:
let
  readTree = dir:
    lib.flatten (lib.mapAttrsToList (name: type:
      if (type == "directory") then
        readTree (dir + "/${name}")
      else
        dir + "/${name}") (builtins.readDir dir));

  repository = callPackage ./build-maven-repository.nix { };
  jars = lib.traceVal
    (builtins.filter (path: (lib.hasSuffix ".jar" (toString path)))
      (readTree repository));
  classpath = lib.concatStringsSep ":" jars;
in stdenv.mkDerivation rec {
  pname = "maven-demo";
  version = "1.0";

  src = builtins.fetchTarball
    "https://github.com/fzakaria/nixos-maven-example/archive/main.tar.gz";
  buildInputs = [ maven makeWrapper ];

  buildPhase = ''
    echo "Using repository ${repository}"
    mvn --offline -Dmaven.repo.local=${repository} package;
  '';

  installPhase = ''
    mkdir -p $out/bin

>     mkdir -p $out/share/java

Reviewer 2: Unneeded.

```suggestion
    mkdir -p $out/share/java
```

    install -Dm644 target/${pname}-${version}.jar $out/share/java
    # create a wrapper that will automatically set the classpath
    # this should be the paths from the dependency derivation
    makeWrapper ${jre}/bin/java $out/bin/${pname} \

>           --add-flags "-classpath $out/share/java/${pname}-${version}.jar:${classpath}" \

Reviewer: `classpath` requires the repo to be built before evaluation can continue, but there's no need.

This could be implemented with `find` like
```bash
classpath=$(find ${repository} -name "*.jar" -printf ':%h/%f');
echo ${classpath#:} # remove the starting colon if any
```

It's also nice to set `repository` as a derivation attribute as in
```
stdenv.mkDerivation {
  # ...
  inherit repository;
  installPhase = ''
    # ...
    classpath=$(find $repository -name "*.jar" -printf ':%h/%f');
}
```

It has the side effect of adding a `repository` attribute that's accessible by other expressions and the repl.

Reviewer: Same applies to `${jre}`.

Author: I agree with you if this was a real nixpkgs derivation for a real package but this is intended to be a working snippet to read through. Keeping it not fully declarative and overrideable might be the best approach.

Not sure I see your point about the _repository_;  doing 
`classpath=$(find ${repository} -name "*.jar" -printf ':%h/%f');` will require the derivation to be in the /nix/store or will build it.

Author: Resolved! thanks for the snippet as my bash sucks.

          --add-flags "Main"
  '';
}
```

> ### MANIFEST file via Maven Plugin

Reviewer 2: Is this a necessity to the above? It should be made clear in general, whether sections are targeted towards developers of a `shell.nix` with maven, or casual contributors to Nixpkgs that just want to add a Java program to Nixpkgs, and compile it from source. Hence, I don't understand in what case one should need to "augment" the `pom.xml` file.

Author: I added such sections.

Augment the _pom.xml_ to create a JAR with the following manifest:
```xml
<build>
  <plugins>
    <plugin>
        <artifactId>maven-jar-plugin</artifactId>
        <configuration>
            <archive>
                <manifest>
                    <addClasspath>true</addClasspath>
                    <classpathPrefix>../../repository/</classpathPrefix>
                    <classpathLayoutType>repository</classpathLayoutType>
                    <mainClass>Main</mainClass>
                </manifest>
                <manifestEntries>
                    <Class-Path>.</Class-Path>
                </manifestEntries>
            </archive>
        </configuration>
    </plugin>
  </plugins>
</build>
```

> This instructs the JAR to look for the necessary dependencies in the _lib/_ relative folder. The layout of the folder is also in the _maven repository_ style.

We will modify the derivation above to add a symlink to our repository so that it's accessible to our JAR during the _installPhase_.

```nix
{ pkgs ? import <nixpkgs> { }, stdenv ? pkgs.stdenv, lib ? pkgs.lib
, maven ? pkgs.maven, callPackage ? pkgs.callPackage

> , makeWrapper ? pkgs.makeWrapper, jre ? pkgs.jre }:

Author: These defaults exist because for the purpose of demonstration each file (https://github.com/fzakaria/nixos-maven-example) is individually runnable via _nix-build_

# pick a repository derivation, here we will use buildMaven
let repository = callPackage ./build-maven-repository.nix { };
in stdenv.mkDerivation rec {
  pname = "maven-demo";
  version = "1.0";

  src = builtins.fetchTarball
    "https://github.com/fzakaria/nixos-maven-example/archive/main.tar.gz";
  buildInputs = [ maven makeWrapper ];

  buildPhase = ''
    echo "Using repository ${repository}"
    mvn --offline -Dmaven.repo.local=${repository} package;
  '';

  installPhase = ''
    mkdir -p $out/bin
    mkdir -p $out/share/java

    # create a symbolic link for the repository directory

>     ln -s ${repository} $out/repository

Reviewer 2: Why is this needed?

Author: Please see the comment above about the _CLASSPATH_ value in the jar's MANIFEST file.

  <groupId>io.github.fzakaria</groupId>
  <artifactId>maven-demo</artifactId>
  <version>1.0</version>
  <packaging>jar</packaging>
  <name>NixOS Maven Demo</name>

  <dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>com.vdurmont</groupId>
        <artifactId>emoji-java</artifactId>
        <version>5.1.1</version>
      </dependency>
  </dependencies>
</project>
```

Our main class file will be very simple:

```java
import com.vdurmont.emoji.EmojiParser;

public class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    String str = "NixOS :grinning: is super cool :smiley:!";
    String result = EmojiParser.parseToUnicode(str);
    System.out.println(result);
  }
}
```

You find this demo project at https://github.com/fzakaria/nixos-maven-example

## Solving for dependencies

### buildMaven with NixOS/mvn2nix-maven-plugin

> ⚠️ Although _buildMaven_ is the "blessed" way within nixpkgs, as of 2020, it hasn't seen much activity in quite a while.

_buildMaven_ is an alternative method that tries to follow similar patterns of other programming languages by generating a lock file. It relies on the maven plugin [mvn2nix-maven-plugin](https://github.com/NixOS/mvn2nix-maven-plugin).

> First you generate a _project-info.json_ file using the maven plugin.

Author: Fixed

  # replace this with the correct SHA256
  outputHash = stdenv.lib.fakeSha256;
}
```

The build will fail, and tell you the expected `outputHash` to place. When you've set the hash, the build will return with a _/nix/store_ entry whose contents are the full Maven repository.

> Some additional files are deleted that would cause the output hash to change potentially on subsequent runs.

```bash
❯ tree $(nix-build --no-out-link double-invocation-repository.nix) | head
/nix/store/8kicxzp98j68xyi9gl6jda67hp3c54fq-maven-repository
├── backport-util-concurrent
│   └── backport-util-concurrent
│       └── 3.1
│           ├── backport-util-concurrent-3.1.pom
│           └── backport-util-concurrent-3.1.pom.sha1
├── classworlds
│   └── classworlds
│       ├── 1.1
│       │   ├── classworlds-1.1.jar
```

If your package uses _SNAPSHOT_ dependencies or _version ranges_; there is a strong likelihood that over-time your output hash will change since the resolved dependencies may change. Hence this method is less recommended then using `buildMaven`.

## Building a JAR

Regardless of which strategy is chosen above, the step to build the derivation is the same.

```nix

> { pkgs ? import <nixpkgs> { }, stdenv ? pkgs.stdenv, lib ? pkgs.lib

Reviewer 2: It's confusing to see the defaults (`?`) in here, IMO. Because I think most readers will just want to use the methods presented here to contribute packages, and in that case that is bad practice.

Author: Fixed.
